---
layout: page
title: Gyrotactic plume formation and bioconvection
description: A series of work on gyrotactic plume gives new interpretation on the classical pattern that is bioconvection.
img: assets/img/publication_preview/Fung2020a.png
importance: 2
category: Bio-Active Fluids
---
Many microorganisms are motile, that is, they swim. Some motile micro-organisms (swimmers), such as the micro-algae *Chlamydomonas augustae* (née *nivalis*), navigate towards the upper surface by being bottom-heavy. In a downflowing pipe, the balance between the gravitational and viscous torque causes the micro-organism to swim towards the centre, forming a focused beam-like structure. This sideway drift of bottom-heavy swimmers is known as gyrotaxis. Gyrotaxis is responsible for many naturally occurring phenomena, such as bioconvection, micro-patchiness and the formation of thin phytoplankton layers in some parts of the ocean.

In a series of work, we model different pattern formations due to gyrotaxis, and compare various continuum model for the swimmer phase. [Our first publication](http://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.614) compare the consequences of [the popular model by Pedley & Kessler](http://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.fluid.24.1.313) with [the more accurate model based on the generalized Taylor dispersion theory](http://doi.org/10.1063/1.1458003) in the formation of gyrotactic plume. We found that [the Pedley & Kessler model](http://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.fluid.24.1.313) overestimates the swimmer's effective dispersion, which results in a steady plume profile that is not physical. Instead, the gyrotactic plume should be considered as a singular structure that tends to blow up in finite time, as explained by [our later work](http://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2023.242). Subsequently, the formation of blips (blobs of swimmers formed from the plume at later stages) should be considered as a streamwise instability on a developing plume profile instead of a steady profile.

[Our second publication](http://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.684) considers the consequence of the geometry of the container. Suprisingly, the cylindrical shape of the container give rises to a sequence of transcritical bifurcation from the uniform state, which corresponds to the bioconvective instability. These subcritical bifurcations are in contrast to the supercriticla pitchfork bifurcations previous found in two-dimensional analysis, highlighting the importance of geometry in the pattern formation. 