---
layout: post
title: Welcome to my new blog!
date: 2026-02-25 12:00:00
description: They say there is a time for everything - a time to be born and a time to die. I think my ideas should also have a place to live, or die.
tags: ideas
categories: misc
---

Welcome to my new blog! This will be a place where I occasionally share some preliminary thoughts and ideas about fluids, ML and everything in between. None of these are peer-reviewed or checked, so take them with a few pinches of salt, but you'll get to see a lot of my raw ideas before getting butchered by reviewer #2. 

The reason for writing here instead of publishing a paper is because I simply have way more ideas than I have time to work them into a proper paper. Being a big believer that science is a community effort, I thought it might be better to throw it out to the community and get feedback (i.e., criticisms) than to let the idea die in my notebook. I don't mind people "borrow"/extend upon my ideas. All I ask of you is to be civil and acknowledge them if you ever find any of my ideas useful. To be fair, I believe that most of my ideas contain some flaws or misconceptions, so please feel free to point them out in any way you can.

I will also use this space to share/promote/show off some of my students' works, which are definitely superior to most of my dumb ideas.

For upcoming few weeks, I will uploading one of the project my brilliant student, Sean De Marco, has been working on last summer. He has been comparing how Neural Networks and Finite Elements represents a PDE solution from a theoretical perspective, drawing parallels between the two. For those who is very into (or despise) Physics-Informed Neural Networks, this is going to be an interesting read!