---
layout: post
title: PINN vs FEM III - Numerical Comparison between Finite Elements and Single-Layer Perceptron
date: 2027-06-01 11:00:00
description: The Numerical Manifestations of Physics-Informed Neural Networks and Finite Elements Methods
tags: PINN, FEM
categories: PINN-vs-FEM
thumbnail: assets/img/NNvsFEM.png
authors:
  - name: Sean De Marco
    affiliations:
      name: Aeronautics, Imperial
  - name: Lloyd Fung
---

(Co-authored by Sean De Marco and Lloyd Fung)

[In the previous post](../NNvsFEM-2/), we have demonstrated the theoretical link between FEM and PINN, you might begin to question why despite being mathematically equivalent, the two methods yield different results. This blog addresses that question. By bringing the theoretical commonalities into a visual sense you will begin to understand why we say that SLP is adaptively meshed FEM in disguise.

# How do they recreate solutions?

In the previous blog we discussed how elements in FEM have compact support, whereas SLP is not constrained in its optimisation and therefore each nodal activation spans the whole domain. Intuitively you can already start to imagine how each method reconstructs the solution, have a think of what that would look like and then have a look at the image below.

<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
  <div class="col-">
  {% include figure.liquid 
    loading="eager" 
    path="assets/img/NNvsFEM/FEM_basis_activ.svg" 
    class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" 
    caption="The basis recreation (dashed lines) of a polynomial function using FEM overlaid on the optimised solution"
  %}
  </div>
</div>

<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
  <div class="col-">
  {% include figure.liquid 
    loading="eager" 
    path="assets/img/NNvsFEM/fixed_layer_activ.svg" 
    class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" 
    caption="The nodal recreation (dashed lines) of a polynomial function using SLP overlaid on the optimised solution"
  %}
  </div>
</div>

So, we see that for FEM, each element is non-zero only in the region in which it acts, by summing all these individual contributions over the whole domain in a way that fulfills the PDE, the solution can be reconstructed! Now put your attention towards the ELM recreation and its nodal activations, we see that each node activates across the whole domain (these activations actually have the profile of a sigmoidal activation, but the rescaling of the second y-axis squished them so now they look linear), just like in FEM, we can sum the contribution of each node, then the solution to the PDE is recreated! This style of reconstruction applies even to higher dimensional PDEs, but more emphasis needs to be placed on the expressivity of the first layer weights, which is responsible for deciding the activation direction. More on this later.

From this simple case, you can already see how well the SLP recreates the solution, surpassing the FEM's performance with the same number of optimised parameters. So why do we not replace all FEM solvers with PINN solvers and call it a day? Hoorah AI has taken over! FEM is no more... Well no. While the activation function in NN being globally supported might have helped the SLP to use less nodes compared to FEM, it also comes with some costs. One of the cost is that the training cost scales worst in more complex solutions. The other is the violation of information structure, both of which we have briefly discussed in the [previous post](https://llfung.github.io/blog/2026/NNvsFEM-2/). Here, we will focus on another Achilles' heel of PINN -  spectral bias.

(N.B: Continuing from the previous post, we will assume the SLP is trained by ELM with an intentionally designed $\mathbf{W}^{(1)}$ and $\mathbf{b}^{(1)}$. This way, we can show how spectral bias arise.)

# The curse of being too expressive

It's often argued that FEM is better than PINN because it doesn't have the spectral bias that plagued PINN. That is actually not entirely true. FEM is also inherently bias in its spectrum - the mesh density determines the highest frequency FEM can resolve. The idea that FEM is not as spectrally-biased is because that bias is explicitly and trivially shown and actively removed by users. By construction, FEM's trial function obeys a certain mesh. This implies that if we increase the mesh density, the equivalent first-layer weight $\mathbf{W}^{(1)}$ in the SLP representation of FEM also increases. This is why if we have higher frequency signal in the solution, all we have to do in FEM is to increase mesh density such that we resolve the solution in the frequency it needs to be. In other words, the act of meshing to convergence by the user is the way FEM removes the spectral bias. 

SLP, in constrast, do not have this correlation between the first-layer weights $\mathbf{W}^{(1)}$ and the number of nodes $H$ built-in. Instead, $\mathbf{W}^{(1)}$ and $H$ are free to vary independently. This flexibility is a major reason for SLP's higher expressivity compared to FEM - it has more freedom to choose the width of the activation, i.e. how rapidly the activation function rise from $0$ to $1$. However, it is also this expressivity that is the source of spectral bias. The fact that the first-layer weights $\mathbf{W}^{(1)}$ is no longer tied to a mesh implies that we rely on either a smart choice of its value when we are training an ELM, or in a more traditional way to train NNs, on the optimiser to do the job of tuning the weights towards the right order of magnitude to resolve the spectrum of solution. The problem is that the optimiser may not always optimise $\mathbf{W}^{(1)}$ towards the right spectrum. Sometimes, it may get stuck in low frequnecy minimum, which matches the solution at low frequency, but not in high frequency. Hence, spectrum bias can be thought as a failure for the optimiser to converge to the global minima of a loss.

## An illustrative example through ELM

Let us examine this bias with a test case featuring one large structure and one smaller structure, crudely recreating a multi-scale task. To highlight how spectral bias occurs, we will continue to use ELM with a fixed weight of $\mathbf{W}^{(1)}=\mathbf{1}$. For FEM, we assumed that a sufficiently fine mesh would capture both large and small scale features, as seen in the image below, it did. However, the SLP-ELM solution failed to resolve the high frequency component. Of course, this is expected - the fact that we fixed $\mathbf{W}^{(1)}=\mathbf{1}$ means no matter how big $H$ is ($H=1000$ in this case),
the activation function can never resolve the higher frequency signal in $x$. This is how spectral bias occurs. FEM, in contrast, has the equivalent of $\mathbf{W}^{(1)}$ scaling with the mesh density (equivalent to $H$), which allows it to resolve higher frequency with denser mesh.

<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
  <div class="col-">
  {% include figure.liquid 
    loading="eager" 
    path="assets/img/femvspinn/compfreq.svg" 
    class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" 
    caption="Multi-scale task"
  %}
  </div>
</div>

## So, how do we fix it?
Given the deliberate example above, the fix should be pretty appearant, right? Just tune $\mathbf{W}^{(1)}$ higher to resolve the high frequency!
By varying the first layer weights $\mathbf{W}^{(1)}$, we are effectively stretching or contracting the activation function on $x$, allowing the activation functions to represent different frequency in $x$. Meanwhile, varying the first layer biases $\mathbf{b}^{(1)}$ allow us to shift the activation function to specific locations after rescaling.  

Let us see this in action using ELM. Previously, we fixed the first layer with constant weights $\mathbf{W}^{(1)}=1$ and uniformly distributed the first layer bias $\mathbf{b}^{(1)}$ across the whole domain. The node-output weights were then optimised in a linear least squares fashion (i.e. through ELM). As discussed above, the result wasn't so great. Now, let us change $\mathbf{W}^{(1)}$ according to the mesh density. By rescaling $\mathbf{W}^{(1)}$ to match the frequency needed to resolve the solution, and shifting $\mathbf{b}^{(1)}$ to keep the distribution across the domain as before, the SLP can now resolve the higher multi-scale solution much better, achieving the similar accuracy as FEM. 

## So what happens when we train the SLP fully instead?

Now that we know we need to vary $\mathbf{W}^{(1)}$ according to the the high frequency solution, you are probably asking, can't the optimiser do this automatically?

Well, the answer is, sort of? It really comes down to the initial guess of $\mathbf{W}^{(1)}$ and the specific optimiser you are using. We can think of this  more mechanistically. The optimisers's objective is to minimise the loss. Since the dominant structure (the low frequency signal) in the solution are more dominant in contributing to the loss, they tend to be minimised first, often at the price of finer (higher frequency) structure. This inherent bias to solve low frequency first can sometimes push the optimiser towards local minima and get stuck there instead of the global minima, giving rise to spectral bias in PINNs. 

However, it does not necessarily mean it will never converge correctly. In fact, if you know a priori the rough order of magnitude of the spectrum and initialise $\mathbf{W}^{(1)}$ accordingly, chances are you may be able to converge correctly. Even if you do not know the spectrum, given high enough $H$ and a wide enough spectrum when you initialise $\mathbf{W}^{(1)}$, there is still a good chance one or few of the nodes have initial value close to the correct spectrum and therefore able to converge. This is why a proper initial guess f

<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
  <div class="col-">
  {% include figure.liquid 
    loading="eager" 
    path="assets/img/NNvsFEM/SLP+FEM-multi.svg" 
    class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" 
    caption="FEM captures both large and small scales, but SLP fails to - we see spectral bias in action"
  %}
  </div>
</div>

Note that it does not necessarily imply that FEM will no suffer from the same problem. However, the fact that the mesh inherently tied up the degree of freedom $H$ with the scaling of $\mathbf{W}^{(1)}$ implies that if high frequency is not resolved, its loss will clearly reflect this to user as poor convergence, nudging the user to increase meshing to resolve the high frequency.  

In higher dimensions, the thousands more parameters and deeper NNs used tend to exercate the spectral bias problem. The exact reason on why high dimensional problems or depth of the NNs makes the problem worse is still under invesgation. However, it is not difficult to image the loss landscape tend to be more challenging to navigate in higher dimensional problem, increasing the chances of convergence to poor resolution. By illustrating these challenges, we begin to demystify the often opaque inner workings of PINNs.

## So are PINNs meshless?

Yes and No. It's "meshless" in the sense that the weights are no longer tied to a mesh, which earns PINN higher expressivity. This expressivity, along with the overcoming of the curse of dimensionality through the depth of MLP (we will discuss that further in another post), is the main advantage PINN has over FEM. Yet, it's not entirely "meshless" in that any arbitrary architecture can represent any arbitrarily complex solution at arbitrary precision. There is still a "mesh", that is the NN architecture itself, that needs to be tuned according to the solution. This tuning will likely scale with the complexity of the solution it represents. Hence, in many ways, **the NN architecture is the new "mesh"**, and all the difficulties of generating meshes in numeric methods will also likely apply to the design of NN architecture. In particular, like FEM, to converge to a correct solution, we actually requires some prior knowledge of the solution itself!

# Summary 

In this post, we numerically demonstrated the implications of what we called adaptively meshed FEM in disguised. Particularly, we focused how the globally supported nature of SLP activations is a double-edged sword, providing great flexibilty but coming at the cost of a lack of convergence guarantee and well-conditioning. 

We showed that the first layer weights and biases are responsible for controlling the width, direction and location of the activations. Through the simple Poisson BVP tasks, SLP's flexibility was used to demonstrate the simplest form of spectral bias in PINNs. When the SLP was not initialised for the right frequency, it struggles to converge to a correct solution, ultimately converging to a lower frequency solution. There, we can say that the PINN demonstrated spectral bias. However, tuning the activation width (i.e., tuning $\mathbf{W}^{(1)}$) help SLP to converge much better. In the tasks, the sigmoid activations were contracted such that they were able to represent the small scale features in the problem. This would be similair to adapting a mesh in FEM to account for areas of high variation.

The ability to control the width, direction and location of activations puts into question whether PINNs are truly meshless. We choose to crash the meshless party and say that SLPs are not meshless, they are just globally supported FEM with a neural network's flexibility, where the mesh is hiddedn in the opacity of the model's architecture. This means if you are using PINNs, you are still "meshing" implicitly when you design an architecture that works. And that means the same old challenges of mesh generation, adaptivity and prior knowledge still apply.

So, if PINNs are just adaptively meshed FEM in disguise, the question is not whether to use them, but rather how to use them better. How can we leverage their adaptivity without falling into the same old traps? Perhaps the answer lies in information theory. But enough for today, that is for a future blog post.
